hello and welcome to topcast well it it
basically is topcast this is a live
recording I suppose different to my
other live streams I'm not just doing an
AMA and just talking about kind of
random stuff
um instead I've
come across I should say I was uh
provided with a link to an article that
I'm going to be responding to because
the article gives me a chance to respond
to what I regard as some Trope
criticisms of reason and rationality
the Trope in the sense that they come up
all the time I think unfairly but also
there is legitimacy behind them because
some people misrepresent rationality and
because they misrepresent rationality
then rationality
comes in for this criticism but it's
misdirected they're criticizing the
wrong thing they're calling it
rationality but in fact what they're
criticizing is I would say not
rationality
what am I talking about okay so there's
this article called the clenched fist of
reason and the link is in the
description so long as I've done
everything right
um and it's provided to me by Lily
Tennant and Lieutenant is a great
Expositor of all things critical
rationalism epistemology knowledge
creation optimism all that kind of great
stuff
and so she just wanted my ideas on this
so not only respond to her which I think
it couldn't possibly have been done in a
tweet or even a thread uh there was just
so much in this article as I wrote
through it's a very long article
and so many places I wanted to pause at
object to
and just point out that this doesn't
really representing what rationality is
it's called the clenched fist of reason
but then the word reason barely makes an
appearance throughout the article the
author is critiquing at times a vision
of rationality and I get the impression
just an impression that he's got
specific people in mind that he's
responding to
rather than
a specific kind of philosophy so to
speak
he's heard certain individuals say
things and he's upset about those things
and he's directing his anger towards
what he's calling rationality but people
call rationality all sorts of things all
the time and they get it completely
wrong uh
oh good drink and hear me John yes so
although I'm live I've got comments
there that's good um so although
uh people call these things rationality
at times
they're often not rationality and they
give rationality a bad name and if they
tarnish the reputation of rationality
look Stephen Pinker wrote a book called
rationality and I think that it's
irrational in large part
I shouldn't say large part large Parts a
significant minority of the book
contains
significant misconceptions about what I
think rationality amounts to
and it emits a whole bunch of stuff that
I think is absolutely essential for
rationality
conjectural knowledge would be one thing
you can't be a rational person if you
reject the idea of conjectural knowledge
if you do not mention Papa
in your exposition of rationality
or papyrian epistemology let's say or
the contents thereof
I would say you're being irrational
especially if you claim to have some
knowledge of
him and his philosophy so you know
people can say they're rational and be
completely wrong about look
yeah personal personal anecdotes you
know I was brought up Catholic I don't
practice anymore
and
the
the thing is you know you brought up
Catholic you go to a Catholic school you
go to Catholic Church very frequently
and you sometimes don't realize what
you've got when you've been presented
with it of course you know I'm one of
these people who say School shouldn't be
coercive and your church is
authoritarian and all this sort of stuff
however it's not to say there isn't
value there to be found
and I certainly found value I certainly
found value in my time at the church on
in retrospect
excuse me
wipe my nose um
in retrospect I find that I was sitting
in the pews of the church contemplating
things greater than myself
I was contemplating in Wonder and awe at
the magnificence of existence
it really for me wasn't about
the supernatural
I was given a time during church let's
say
contemplative time
silent
okay sometimes I didn't want to be there
but you know you have to try and find
the gems when you're put into I guess
the darkness and so
there there we are you know forced of
course this is not a good thing to be
forced into a situation you don't want
to be in but
what can I extract from now I can
extract from that it gave me time to
contemplate it gave me time to do what
people
talk about as
introspection and meditation today
so I fully understand why people are
attracted to this particular practice I
do think I do think
the Catholics and their prayer
emulate some of
the Buddhists in their meditation
they just haven't explained it as well
the Buddhists are very good at
explaining precisely what they're doing
the Catholics not so much
and I know people over time have said
things like
the difference between Eastern
spirituality
and Western spirituality is like the
difference between Western medicine and
Eastern medicine but in the opposite
direction in other words there's
something precise and which works in
eastern Traditions that isn't there in
Western traditions and I just think
that's wrong
I think that it is there in Western
Traditions it's just that it's not
explained well at all
so there is there is there is certainly
a difference there but I think that you
know as a child I was given this
opportunity
to
sit in these
magnificent buildings
contemplate the cosmos that was for me
and that was a transcendental type of
experience for me
formational
that said
I was one of these people there are many
such people
that once you leave school in that
environment immediately
you find all the zealotry of atheism
which is what I found
I lost you know any thought that there
was anything Supernatural at all and I
became committed
I committed evangelist for the the cause
of atheism and eventually I found Sam
Harris and Richard Dawkins and the uh
Christopher Higgins I thought it was
great these people are speaking my
language putting into eloquent words
what I only hoped I could argue
your Chief among them you know Richard
Dawkins you know dismissing the entire
project of religion basically as
worthless except you know it has some
good art and architecture
and I bought into this for a long time
and now I think I'm more mature and I
reflect on these things and I think that
that application of rationality that
dismissal of
uh something about Consciousness about
the subjective experience
what might be called spirituality and as
we'll get to in this article what might
be called Magic
is something that I don't think that
rationality
rightly does
when claims are made that stand and
start contrast to what the laws of
physics permit
then we have a problem
when we have unreasonable claims
we have things that don't stand up to
actual tests in the world
comparisons against physical reality
things that don't work or actively cause
harm then we've got a problem
and this can happen in religion this can
happen in certain ancient Traditions now
do this thing it'll help you and in fact
it harms you
I'll come back to that as well
so
I'm going to talk about all of these
things through the lens of this
particular article this article is just
a vehicle for me to not necessarily
criticize the author of the article
although I'm going to do that I don't
know the author of the article
I don't know much else about uh this
person but I think they articulate a
particular tone and feeling
about rationality which is important to
counter
because
I think I was kind of the person that
the kind of person the archetypical
person that this author has in mind I
was once that person I think the person
you might have in mind is like a Michael
Shermer or Richard Dawkins
insofar as they espouse rationality
their Style
and technique can at times be such that
it appears they reject mystery
and that can be a problem
or or
they can appear to be saying
that science is near complete
or the only game in town
or
makes everything else
lack value
because science is the final word on
things okay and so this comes out of a
misunderstanding of rationality end of
Science and of Reason broadly
this idea that we're nearly at the end
we've nearly explained everything
there's nothing ineffable and
Transcendent out there much less open
problems
but it's just another way of saying open
Problems by the way when I say things
like Transcendent in ineffable
what I mean is inexplicit inexplicit
knowledge people
having an idea that there's something
there in reality but not being able to
put it into words
and so therefore you have these
spiritual traditions
and other kinds of things
ancient wisdom which try to Grapple with
the inexplicity
there was that great conversation that
Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson had their
first ever conversation on the making
sense podcast
about what the meaning of Truth was
and
they broke down on lines of well Jordan
of course thought there was this kind of
truth that is in stories and narrative
this
jungian way about capturing reality
without stating clearly what the facts
are but rather it's more a narrative
there's truth there there's truth in the
stories of the Old and New Testament
because that's moral messages there that
are true and he would say that you know
evolutionarily speaking what works is
true
and Sam would say look if you can't
explicitly State these facts then what
you're talking about isn't truth it's
something else you know and so there are
loggerheads on what truth was my comment
on that at the time was well Jordan's
talking about the inexplicit knowledge
Sam's talking about explicit they don't
have the language to actually cross that
divide and so this is why they're at
loggerheads if they could just both
admit there are these two kinds of
knowledge in the world neither of which
mean final truth but can contain truth
and we can make the inexplicit more
explicit over time
that I think would have solved the uh
what some people regarded as the train
wreck of a conversation I don't think it
was really a train wreck I think that
they had a meeting of mines and they
articulated both
misconceptions about how to talk about
mythology and misconceptions about how
to talk about explicit science and facts
they would have that if they had David
Deutsch
be that as a man
let's go to this article you can read
along if you can look in the um
the description to this video
called the clenched fist of reason
I should say let me I'm just looking off
to the side here because I have my
computer over here I'm going to look up
what the question was
that Lully actually asked me
really asked
um and she tweeted out
top teacher I'm curious how you see
critical rationalism fitting into this
article which says there have been waves
of spiritualism followed by rationalism
followed by spiritualism is there
something more enduring about it or
another way of coming
so I apologize to Lily I'm I'm kind of
going to ignore
um I'm not going to ignore the question
but the purpose of this video really
isn't
it's just in passing I'm going to be
answering that question so uh I'm doing
that courtesy I hope so I apologize I
never got to you on Twitter so hopefully
this makes up for that
I I'm I don't know how I see critical
rationalism fitting into the article I
don't like to you know I don't like to
speak for critical rationalism I don't
know sometimes what people mean when I
talk about critical rationalism
even though you know people like David
Deutsch myself Lulu might answer to
critical rationalism in the absence of
any other label I don't like these
ideas I just think that there's
epistemology
there is knowledge there's the study of
how knowledge is created
and replaced by better knowledge how
progress occurs and I just call that
epistemology now people can say that's
well that is critical rationalism which
okay
but there are flavors of critical
Correctional I just think there's the
only one way in which knowledge is
created it's the way in which knowledge
is great because like there's physics
okay so people talk about ever ready and
quantum theory but really it's just
physics and appending Everett to it
it turns it into sort of a subjective
idea that you know somehow or other
this person has laid down what quantum
theory is
when he did no such thing
he gave us uh an Insight an insight into
how to understand quantum theory but he
doesn't own it
so it's not ever-ready and conflict it's
just quantum theory and quantum theory
says that there's a Multiverse and so on
it's the same way by the way that people
talk about deutschian it's the wrong
term there is no deutschian philosophy
there is no deutschian perspective on
things there is no deutscheon optimism
there is optimism in David Deutsche Sans
but really it is just an idea that is
out there in the world objective
independent of anyone else now David has
explained these things but it doesn't
make it deutschian deutschin is the
wrong term it's subjective
these are not subjective ideas this is
not about a person iron Rand had this
idea she rejected the notion that and
she regarded as an insulting that her
philosophy which she called objectives I
think wrongly okay that's another story
but anyone who called it randian was
insulting her she didn't want that to be
said because among other things
it reduces ideas to
the contents of a particular person's
mind and they're not about that
David Deutsch's version of various
philosophies can be
understood refined and improved upon and
and at that point they'll be taken away
from he can be the originator
but it doesn't mean it remains on in the
same way that you know Einstein we say
Einstein's general relativity but he
doesn't own it
he should be credited for inventing it
in the first place but to continue to
say well Einstein physics it's misguided
it's not einsteining in physics it's not
like we're again subjectivist this idea
that you can just pick and choose your
physics I'll pick Einstein in physics
today and then bohmium physics tomorrow
and Newtonian physics and I think now
there's physics and there's our best
understanding of physics
now David Deutsche just happens to have
the best understanding of a whole bunch
of things and so including optimism but
it is there is a specific species of
optimism explained by him what I'm
saying now is
cease using the word deutschian it's not
it's not correct
and so
when we get to
um talking about critical rationalism I
sometimes have a difficulty as well
because I just want to understand
knowledge so I don't I'm sorry first
thing I'm going to apologize to Louis
and say
I don't know the answer to that question
I'm going to object towards the end and
I'll get to this about this idea of the
Waves coming I just think the the
article asserts that but I'm not
persuaded at all I'll give my vote
they've given a version of history of
this version of history as being as Lily
said
waves of rationalism followed by
spiritualism
that's the way the article presents a
vision of History
I'm going to reject that
and say that I don't think that ever
happens
I don't think it happened
there have been epochs where they've
been these as they would say many
enlightenments
but this is not waves and and by the way
it would be historicism to say another
one's coming based on that fact
and someone has said defining
rationalism too closely slips into
essentialism I couldn't agree more
that's exactly right this idea of trying
to Define things very closely just let's
just stick with explanations
the explanation of how knowledge
progresses is epistemology that's the
domain that's the subject area
um yeah and and popper and Deutsche
together have produced the best version
of that
okay so let's go
it's much longer than I anticipated
um I haven't even started reading the
article it's been 20 minutes okay the
clenched fist of reason
so firstly that's the title of the
article already you're put into I've
written some notes here but already I'm
put into a mind of a negative view of
reason
but reason's not a clench fist you know
it's a light it's a means of finding a
solution it's the means of improving
stuff it it can help produce more joy
and wonder in the world it's not
antagonistic to meaning it's a source of
meaning it's not antagonistic to
experience the ineffable the
Transcendent or anything that can
possibly be or be experienced by a
person
is non-antagonistic to any of those
for anything anything that can possibly
be understood
can be understood via reason is the
means of understanding reason deals in
all aspects of the world
from the mind and its contents through
its experiences its perceptions emotions
thoughts ideas in the world would those
ideas are accepted or rejected that's
all the domain of Reason nothing nothing
is outside of reason it's a done reason
okay and unreason is a path to death and
destruction
it just denies just reality denial if
something is part of reality then it is
amenable to reason to uncover that thing
including what is going to be called
Magic in this article if it exists in
reality and it works it's amenable to
reason
so reason is not a clenched fist there's
no clenched fist of reason it's a hand
offered
often in
assistance
here's some help this is reason this is
the thing that's going to help you
but it's opponents apparently
come ready for battle and cast it as the
violent enemy they cast reason and
rationality as the provocateur
the same kind of people who cast
criticism as altogether always
destructive rather than itself truly
being what it is which is a creative act
and so it goes so you get these the the
the the anti-rational
streak through people this is
anti-rationality
at times
in both senses both being simply in
opposition to rationality and in
inculcating means that memes that might
suppress the means of error correction
perhaps we might get into that
okay so the author writes quote
I mentioned in last month's post here
that our familiar term world is a
rounded off version of the Old English
we're old which means man old the time
or age of human beings that bit of
etymology conceals more than one
important insight as I noted last month
it reminds us that this thing we call
the world isn't something holy outside
ourselves
something we experience in an attached
and objective way it's something we
create Moment by moment in our minds by
piecing together the jumble of
unconnected glimpses our senses give us
and we do the piercing piecing according
to a plan that's partly given us
biobiology partly given us by our
culture and partly by our function of
our individual life experience
end quote yes
um we do get ideas that way so I've got
no problem with some of that
but we need to keep this in mind because
this is going to come up again and again
throughout the article
this is my third read of the article now
there's a stark difference between the
world and our ideas about the world
we don't create the world Moment by
moment
we create knowledge of the world
saying we create the world in our own
minds is misleading we create knowledge
of the world in our minds
very big difference between the world
and knowledge of the world
some people have I had trouble grappling
with this and I can't thinking back now
I don't know I guess over 20 25 years
ago or something
it was David Deutsch who brought me out
of this this was an email exchange
um that I had with him
but I can't remember why my psychology
was such that it was back then but it
was
a revelation to me that there was a
difference between the world and our
knowledge of the world
obviously I wasn't a fallibleist
I had the idea I'm trying to remember
what my psychology was back then I had
the idea that when we wrote down the
laws of physics we were writing down the
ultimate and final laws of physics that
was it that was reality
it was David who had to explain to me
and persuade me which he did just by
telling me look there's a difference
between
the world reality physical reality out
there
the thing that science explains
and the knowledge that science creates
the knowledge of the world is not the
world
ultimately becomes part of the world but
it's still not the world it represents
the world it models the world it
explains the world
crucially
so those who actually say or conflate
the world in our ideas of the world sort
of fail to make a distinction between
those two things it really is a version
of idealism
the failure to distinguish between
knowledge or thoughts or ideas and the
things they are knowledge thoughts or
ideas about
let's keep going so it goes on to right
quote
uh
so he's just said
um
that our our ideas are given to us
partly by biology culture and our
individual life experience
and then he goes on to say quote that
point is astonishingly easy to forget
I've long since lost track of the number
of times I've watched distinguished
scientists admit with one breath that
the things we experience around us
aren't real
they're just representations constructed
by our sense organs and brains well I
would say
or we can ignore those people
there is a reality out there okay but
I'm not sure the author I think might
agree with that anyway
so the authors just said
I've long since lost track of the number
of times I've watched distinguished
scientists admit with one breath that
the things we experience around us
aren't real they're just representations
constructed by our sense organs and
brains reacting to an unimaginable
reality of probability waves in four
dimensional space-time and then go on
with the very next breath to forget all
that and act as though matter energy
space time and physical objects exactly
as we perceive them are real in the most
pigh-headedly literal sort of objective
sense I studied the human mind has
nothing to do with any of them except as
a detached Observer end quote so this
has Echoes of Donald Hoffman that Donald
Hoffman's most recent instantiation of
this and tries to make this precise
I've done lots of critiques of him
recently
um
so I won't recapitulate that now because
I'm doing it here
look what was just said there
is also wrong
because we perceive nothing directly yet
our ideas about reality don't come from
nowhere they come from in us and are
about that reality tested against it
they're testing against the reality is
because it's reliable because you will
be able to repeat the test and get the
same results
tell you something about the existence
of those things
that you're testing for the existence of
our claims about the world are about
something about what
well those things that we explain is
real
but the fact that we explain something
as real does not mean we perceive them
as they are or that we are making an
infallible claim
we can regard explanations as lenses of
a kind that bring things into focus more
and more clearly
but we can always have a warped lens we
could always have dirt and smudges on
the lens we could have an almost
entirely out of focus lens
but
that we're seeing something and the fact
our lens brings into view things that
when we prod them react in predictable
ways and allow us to construct Grand
creations and Technologies to control a
whole lot of that stuff out there
means that what we perceive is not
nothing and simply made up by our minds
it means we can have some clarity
but just never final clarity
the fact that this stuff works is
important to appreciate and often
forgotten by critics of science the
scientific worldview and rationality
the theories aren't just narratives
about the world because they actually
allow you to build stuff
you can actually construct the airplane
that flies you can construct the
computer that calculates
these things work and they don't work by
accident
and also the attempt to divorce
scientific theories from Technology and
Engineering is itself a completely
unreasonable and irrational thing to do
but people try they say oh no that's
engineering
it's actually not based on something now
is
you require and understand explanation
of scientific theories in order to build
the computer for example
he goes on to say quote
what's more many of those same
scientists proceed to make sweeping
claims about what human beings can and
can't know and do implied disregard of
the fact that these very claims depend
upon the same notion of the objective
reality of the world of experience
they've just disproved
so I don't really follow that entirely
end quote but as as someone who endorses
a rational worldview informed by the
best ideas that we have I have ideas
that have been refined at the time shown
to work to some degree of accuracy
then I think we can make some claims
about what we can and cannot know
we cannot know for example how to write
down proofs for theorems that are
demonstrably not provable in good or
sense
we can't know that kind of thing we
can't know if certain programs will halt
in Turing sense we cannot know what the
next highest prime number is above the
one we already know without knowing it
so there's the highest prime number at
the moment look up Wikipedia what the
next one is we don't know yet so that
with that we don't know but we can know
we just have to keep looking
we know that we can't know the highest
prime number because there isn't one
we cannot know the content
of future knowledge in general
there is much we cannot know
and that we know
okay he goes on to say quote
it's a fascinating example of
doublethink and we'll be talking about
its implications more than once as this
discussion proceeds that said there is
another Insight hidden in that
deceptively simple term World which is
that the world the manhold the thing
that we're used to experiencing as an
objective reality independent of our
consciousness
even though it's nothing of the kind
it's defined not by space but by time
it's not a place but a time of human
beings and it has a history
end quote
so he said there that
the thing we're used to experiencing as
an objective reality
independent of our Consciousness
independent of our consciousness
well I would reject that
I don't think objective reality is
experienced
if by that we mean experience directly
we don't experience reality directly
it's important to appreciate
this comes out of the work of David
Deutsche Carl papa
I want to call it critical rationalism
well here's rationalism for you
we experience
or indeed we are the experience of
electrical crackles as David Deutsch
talks about that
that's what we are that's the brain is
neurons synapses firing that's what we
are we are the mind
one representation of each of which
is what's happening inside of our brain
right now
that's what we are
our brain interprets these synaptic
firings
which themselves give rise to what we
see and hear and feel
where Minds instantiated on brains
encased in the darkness of skulls
we're far removed from experiencing
objective reality directly
we do however interpret objective
reality we interpret objective reality
and know it exists because we can test
for it
we can use our reason
and as for it being independent of our
Consciousness we'll also no that's a bit
debris
we also create
the reality around us to some extent
and Consciousness is part of reality as
well by the way now there are phenomena
in the universe where we can ignore the
effects of consciousness
uh you know in the scientific realm that
this is often the case you know when the
next Supernova occurs in a galaxy
millions of light years away well that's
objective reality that is independent of
our consciousness
that's happening regardless of whether
or not there are people here on Earth
but when the next announcement is made
by the president of the United States
about a defense deal between Australia
and the UK has happened today that's not
independent of our Consciousness or the
consciousness of some people anyway
nor is Art the products of artistic
Endeavor independent of Consciousness
not journalism or did I say much that's
going on on the internet
these are not independent these are
parts of physical reality
that are not independent of our
Consciousness but shaped by it
shaped by thoughts occurring thoughts
that we're conscious of
he continues quote
part of that history needs to be traced
out over the scale of evolutionary time
Owen Barfield pointed out almost a
century ago for essentially the same
reasons I've decided that all those
images of dinosaurs lumbering around in
vaguely tropical jungles are works of
imaginative fiction
images of what the prehistoric past
would have looked like to human beings
had there been human beings around to
view it which of course there weren't
end quote
so I'm not sure what the claim is that's
being made here
that there weren't dinosaurs
this idea that the pictures are works of
imaginative fiction yes
but big but
the word fiction being used there is
quite slippery
because their interpretations
they're not fictions in the way that an
illustration of a dragon or a unicorn is
we better get the the creatures from
Avatar or Star Wars
you know they're ex they really do exist
fossils and there exists other evidence
you know trapped in Amber and all sorts
of clever techniques that the
paleontologists use these days
to interpret and explain evidence
evidence physical evidence
J.R.R Tolkien was not digging for
evidence in the physical world when he
dreamed up Smaug the dragon or gothmog
the balrog
he might have been riffing on parts of
the Bible which themselves were riffing
on ancient myths oral traditions
but there's a a real difference between
fiction unconstrained by reality
the Free Flight of the imagination
versus
interpretations which are not perfect
representations of reality but which are
constrained by the evidence you're not
just free to draw any dinosaur that you
like you're constrained by
the fossilized remains
and perhaps these days you know scant
amounts of DNA which can tell you
something or whatever chemicals are left
which tell you something about the skin
color they can do that these days and
whether they had feathers and that kind
of thing
so to use fiction
for both of these things
disguises the fact
that there is this distinction to be
made between someone trying as hard as
they can to make a an accurate
representation of a dinosaur and someone
who out of whole cloth as far as is
possible
uh invents the character of E.T the
Extraterrestrial
there's a difference
one is whole holy fiction
unconstrained by any physical evidence
and the other one is wholly constrained
by physical evidence insofar as it can
be
so fiction using fiction for both
disguises that essential difference that
important difference
and anyone who insists I know they're
both really are fictions well they can
sing and again a vicenstinian definition
game
and in which case I'll just say fine
okay call dragons
Harry fiction then still fiction Harry
fiction and called Dinosaurs William
fiction
there's a black and white difference
between Harry and William Harry is
completely made up fiction uncoupled
from reality and William is bound by
physical reality as it appears in rocks
rocks which
kick back when kicked
okay
going on quote
the author says More Than A Century of
research into the nervous systems and
cognitive processes of other living
things have shown definitively that they
don't experience the same world as you
and I a cat for example has modes of
visual processing hardwired into its
eyes and brain that are radically
different from the ones that you have in
yours have you ever watched a cat
staring intently at something you can't
see
something is setting off the cat's
visual processing neurons and not yours
so whatever the cat sees is part of the
cat's world but not part of yours
end quote how do they know it is part of
the cat's visual processing neurons
how is that known I'll come back to that
but anyway
um this idea that the cat perceives
stuff that we don't well there's easier
examples than that Eagles or other birds
who actually have more red cones in
their retinas the retina of their eye so
they must be able to distinguish more
shades of red than humans and that's
experimentally testable
or snakes who could perceive heat again
experimentally testable they've got
infrared detectors
or bats and dolphins who use
echolocation
but
humans routinely detect all of those
signals and more that's what sonar and
radar radio telescopes infrared cameras
microphones and more besides allow to
see and experience more of the World by
augmenting ourselves like some sort of
super cyborg we see way better than any
animal
why more distant all the wavelengths of
light nothing we are blind to nothing
now in terms of wavelengths of light
we can hear anything
we can see the heat left over from The
Big Bang the mere ability to have these
senses in your mind somehow
it's of little benefit when you don't
understand what it is you see
but this is what humans can do with our
technology
we far exceed the capacity of any animal
to have an experience of these things if
by having experience means detect that
thing
now if you want the thing fed straight
into your brain via some neural link
well one day it's coming we're not there
yet but I don't see why this is a
massively significant philosophical
issue
it's not
in other cases we want to understand
what it is we detect the cat doesn't
understand a thing
he goes on to say quote
in evolutionary terms mind you the cat
and you are practically kissing cousins
factor in 100 million years of
evolutionary history
and the yawning genetic Chasm that
separates you from say an allosaur out
for a pleasant stroll in The Greenery of
a Jurassic sired forest cycad forest and
you might have some sense of how
different the world that the allosaur
experienced was from yours the Allison
saw heard felt and smelled the world
vastly different than you would have
experienced had you been hiding from an
A hungry kin in that same Forest end
quote this is Wittgenstein again this is
pure Wittgenstein
um
if a lion could speak if a lion could
speak we would not understand it
I know what you're being you know he's
experienced it's experience it's frames
of reference the things that it
understands are different to us okay
people make a big deal about it I just
think Young Lion doesn't understand a
thing
this idea that these other animals have
different experiences to us
okay
and one person has a different
experience to another
um
by the way you couldn't experience well
not for long anyway
dinosaur times
the oxygen levels were higher back then
if you did step out of your time machine
and you weren't in a spacesuit
back
62 plus million years ago you'd be dead
pretty quick from hyperoxemia you know
the too much oxygen
um
the atmosphere was different then it was
an alien world literally
going on
he says quote
there were likely things in its world
the Allison's world that you wouldn't
have perceived at all
and vice versa because it sense organs
and nervous system were variations on
the standard megalos or model while
yours are variations on the radically
different standard primate model
until there were homonyms with eyes and
nervous systems sufficiently like yours
even the most basic elements of the
world
you know didn't yet exist because again
the world is not out there you don't you
don't observe the world you construct it
end quote
oh there's just so much there
um look there are many things hidden
from us but we can if they present a
problem detect them
this idea that these other animals have
these different senses is irrelevant to
us being able to actually detect these
things
like I said you know the snake can
detect infrared radiation but it's not
like infrared radiation is a huge
mystery to us
all one needs to do is to get a pair of
infrared glasses and you can see
everything the snake can see and more
the we have x-ray telescopes no animal
can detect x-rays we can
having an experience of the things that
other animals can
detect
using physical senses that's just
detecting energy by the way vibrations
in the air or vibration
in the form of photons okay energy we're
detecting energy with our senses
instruments can do that if our raw
senses can't
this is no great problem for
understanding the world
that animals have different senses
doesn't mean that they have access to
some information that is denied to us no
we can always detect whatever it is and
we don't find any huge Mystery by the
way it's not like you put on the
infrared camera
and you suddenly start seeing heaps of
stuff
that you normally wouldn't of course at
night things are different but it's not
like you see more interesting things
it's not like you get an insight about
the world
yeah the sun's a lot brighter and
certain things are a lot brighter but so
okay
but there's all sorts of things hidden
to us that is hidden to everyone that
are a mystery like dark matter if it
exists that's a curious case there we go
we've kind of detected something that we
can't even see that's remarkable
and of course yes always in Heaven and
Earth there's more than dreamed of in
our philosophy as the Trope goes we can
agree there are things in our sense that
our senses can't perceive
and hence the existence of this thing
called science
because it explains what we do see in
terms of the Unseen we know the Unseen
is there and if you're really pushed
then as I say our instruments our
telescopes we're all wavelengths of
light and our microphones at all
wavelength to sound
can image or detect those things
really we're becoming more and more like
gods or like Superman of a kind
more and more omniperceptive compared to
our ancestors and certainly compared to
any animal
will never get the ability to see and
hear it all okay because all of it is
all a physical reality but that's just a
consequence of physics and the infinite
in all directions complexity of
objective physical reality
but this idea that this author
says that they're at the end it's
important to linger on he said quote you
don't observe the world you construct it
end quote
this sounds very similar to the paper I
was talking about recently
by wheeler that explains his it from bit
concept he had the idea of the
participatory Universe the participatory
Universe was essentially this idea that
you kind of create the world through
perceiving it
but it's all mistaken
we construct knowledge of the world
and sometimes that knowledge allows us
to create physical stuff in the world
okay art and music buildings computers
phones relationships
Joy great joy new breeds of cat dogs and
cows missiles and missionaries Jets and
jam Etc okay so we we do construct the
world so
we don't merely observe it we construct
it
we construct and observe the world
if we have explanations of it
so we do construct the world in one
sense but it's not either or it's not
observe or or construct we observe we
construct and we do both of those things
only because we can explain that's the
heart of it all
there's every reason to think um well
actually n
my comments there let's go on to what he
says next
quote
there's every reason to think that
within a certain fairly modest range of
individual variation
one cat constructs much the same world
or rather the same catold
as any other cat the same was most
likely true of allosaurs though it's
only fair to admit that cognitive
testing of dinosaurs is a little beyond
the capacity of today's scientists
that similarity is much less true of
human beings because of one of the
evolutionary twists that poll vaulted us
out of our
australopithecine ancestors comfortable
niche as a savannah-dwelling primate and
sent us scampering around the globe end
quote
yes okay
um look people are as different one from
another as one species is from another
in other words quite quite different
very different
okay people have radically different
experiences of the world and because of
the way we generate knowledge
the older we get the more different we
become
one from another except the people that
perhaps we share a home with we become
more similar to over time but still we
have a vastly different experiences of
the world
but again this
as he says there
um
this idea of constructing the world
the
what we mean is what what's really meant
what should be meant is we're
constructing knowledge of the world and
people construct different kinds of
knowledge of the world
but when we use reason
we can converge scientists can and do
converge
on the best explanation
what exists in physical reality
not perfectly but reliably
especially in science when we get to
unknown places in science of course
everywhere is a horizon in science
everywhere is ripe for a new discovery
but in general in science we have
agreement on much
and then disputes about where the active
research is happening
that's where people struggle to come to
agreement because they're trying to
generate new knowledge
but the fact that we have different
models of the world is just a necessary
fact of existence
we create knowledge in different places
and at times because we ourselves are
subjects
we can perhaps well I think often we can
make too much of the fact that we're
separated by time and space and our
background knowledge we can and do
Converge on much because if we didn't
then you know communication would be
impossible
he goes on to say quote
cats construct their cat olds and
allosaurs presumably constructed their
allosaur much olders on the basis of
genetically transmitted patterns that
are hardwired in their nervous systems
and are triggered into activity by
parental Behavior
cats teach their kittens how to hunt for
example and it's been suggested by
paleontologists that allosaurs did much
the same thing for whatever you call
baby dinos baby Allosaurus but in both
cases parental instruction serves as
what
ethologists call a releasing mechanism a
way of triggering and fine-tuning
patterns that are put in place by
genetics end quote
yes I agree with that it's nice to see
it actually this because this point is
often poorly appreciated by people there
is knowledge in the genes
but the knowledge isn't of the form you
know for a cat
um yeah here's how you catch a mouse
but rather here's how you react to
fast-moving things
and you know here is how these
particular muscles and tendons work and
so on so we have what is technically
called Behavior passing even with cats
so the cat teaches the teachers the
kitten
how to hunt
and this is the real thing
because
yeah
at some point in their deep dark
ancestry one of them to survive had to
figure this thing out of how to hunt
and part of that part of those behaviors
have been passed on through the genes
and they can be recombined in different
ways these behaviors so it can sometimes
appear to be the construction of
knowledge but it's not it's just a
reordering at times of
knowledge that's already there in the
genes but this reordering this Behavior
passing is not the generation of new
knowledge much less explanations
okay
um he goes on to say quote
human beings also have a fair number of
hard-wired reactions and releasing
mechanisms the way a child learns to
understand and use language is exactly
akin to the way a kitten learns to hunt
end quote
no it is not no it's not
it's far from it the way a child learns
language no doubt contains some
analogues of what happens in other
animals but the fact we learn language
is unique and the methods for learning
it are unique as well it's not a
behavior passing it is genuine
conjecture of ideas and refutation of
them
now there must be inborn ideas of how to
make sounds for example
but that these abilities are so
extremely elastic in human beings
that the same kinds of brains and Minds
can be placed in as diverse locations
with diverse languages as
China where you will learn the sound
required in order to speak Mandarin
or in England
to learn the sounds required to speak
English or you know name your country
Argentina to learn Spanish
says something about the fact that words
and word order and specific sounds
they're not hardwired at all they are
conjectured
now why learning languages later on in
life becomes harder for many is another
story
but I guess my conjunction is it's
largely to do with the accumulation of
anti-rational memes over time
learned while learning
the first language
but you know initially we lack those
anti-rational means
and so learning takes place really
swiftly because we have no Hang-Ups
about things we have zero Hang-Ups we
gradually accumulate Hang-Ups over time
through poor teaching poor poor lessons
being delivered to us and so on existing
in a culture which
doesn't allow children to thrive
maximally
but I doubt we're born with any Hang-Ups
I doubt I really doubt that insofar as
we are there minimal
the overall majority of Hang-Ups which
prevent you from learning stuff rapidly
later on are learned they're cultural
he goes on to say quote
but we've also evolved a way of
modifying those genetic patterns to a
much more dramatic degree than cats do
or allosaurs did in the process of
learning language and the other
dimensions of its culture a young human
absorbs a distinctive way of
constructing the world
end quote
constructing knowledge of the world
a model of the world in their minds the
distinction here really really matters
because it's otherwise conflating what
exists
with what we know about it
what does not need to be constructed by
the mind with what is constructed by the
mind
the mind is constructing ideas about
something
it's not just constructing the world
the Mind exists in the world
and is learning about it
okay so he goes on to say he's just said
um
a young human absorbs a distinctive way
of constructing the world and that
cultural pattern pushes pools and prods
the inherited World structure shared by
all human beings into a culturally
distinct form
the content of cultural transmission
thus varies from culture to culture and
from person to person
even though the capacity for cultural
transmission has been hardwired into the
brain by millions of years of hominin
evolution so many in the world is
hominid anyway millions of years of
common evolution
so the capacity he says the capacity for
cultural transmission has been hardwired
into the brain by millions of years of
evolution well what I would say about
that is that capacity of being hardwired
if it has been hardwired it's infinite
it's an infinite capacity it's an
unbounded capacity
we have
an unbounded capacity to transmit
cultural knowledge well I mean by that
well what the author seems to mean is
the hardwired capacity is limited in
some way
but say it were well that's just a
soluble problem soluble by knowledge
creation
how to transmit knowledge beyond what
genetics gifts us you know foreign for
example
um genetics limits the volume of human
voices
so that's going to slow
transmission of cultural knowledge
cultural transmission by yelling out
your window using your voice your ideas
is going to limit their reach
but of course knowledge creation these
days has allowed for megaphones and
radios and the internet so cultural
transmission is unbounded
via the means of Technology
messages can get far and wide the speed
of light
As We Know
he goes on to say quote
most people can instantly remember the
words and Melodies of whatever songs
we're playing around the time they hit
puberty for example and that's not
accidental in tribal cultures around the
world that's when young people get
taught the traditional chance and
incantations that guide them through
their adult lives
and much of the same sort of imprinting
that allows toddlers to pick up the
grammar of their native language
effortlessly functions here to fix
traditional songs or top 40 hits in
permanent memory when those same
toddlers reach their teens just pausing
their more reflection on that
that
would be a form of lamarckism if it were
true
um
I don't think that people were getting
wiped out
because
they couldn't remember
a particular chance I don't think that's
the case
I don't think this is the explanation
for why people remember
songs during a particular era of their
lives and I also don't think that's a
universal truth just by the way
I'll just finish reading it and we'll go
on he says quite one point that needs to
be remembered here is that this
imprinting process isn't conscious and
that the imprints left by it can't be
changed by the conscious activities of
the Mind
those of my readers who have ever tried
to get a song out of their minds know
this from personal experience
end quote
well that's everyone so those of my
readers okay everyone has had that that
experience
um
oh imprinting so he's he's okay he's
come up with this thing I think yeah
some other people use this term
imprinting as well
interest interest in a particular thing
something is interesting to you you're
focusing on it don't you remember in
your 20s when you're really focused on
music and going out and dancing and
listening to particular music over and
over and over again why aren't you doing
that now
if you were
you would remember the songs that are
popular now but you're not why
maybe during your 20s you're looking for
a partner and so you're going out to
these various places where you're
playing the same songs over and over and
over again like clubs and so on
pubs whatever wherever you listen to
music
you're interested in music because it's
the it has something to do with
making friends and so on later on you've
got your friends you've got your partner
you listen to music to reminisce
most of us
now my partner
is someone who remembers the words of
obscure present day
K-pop songs
put out this year or last or 10 years
ago
better than the songs
of the 80s and 90s
now
this imprinting thing is not Universal
so I'm not sure that the explanation is
true at all
yeah sure it was something that tribes
needed but my guess is that again again
this has to do with the accumulation of
memes
if you're lucky you don't accumulate
quite so many anti-rational memes
why are some people polyglots and others
aren't
interest is a factor but what causes the
interest again my conjecture is
luck of the drawing being exposed to
particular means or not
taking on or learning those memes so to
speak and not having the knowledge of
how to correct certain errors
some people will be
better or worse at remembering songs
sounds and reproducing them as well
than others based upon their ideas ideas
gained early on in life
don't I think this is uh again I think
there's a universal truths
uh they might be common
but Universal I don't think so I don't
think this is the explanation of what is
happening with that phenomena
uh he goes on to say quote
okay I'm gonna have to completely reword
this paragraph in a minute
so the paragraph As it reads now is
the imprints each human being absorbs
from his or her culture then get
overlaid by various kinds of individual
experience thus as I've noted earlier
the worlds we each construct have three
layers our personal layer derived from
life experience a cultural layer derived
from childhood imprinting and a
biological lab derived from The
evolutionary background of our species
each of these in turn has a history and
that's where we start straying into some
very controversial territory
end quote right I have to fix that
he says
the imprints each human being absorbs I
would say the knowledge each human being
conjectures
from his or her culture then get
overlaid by various kinds of individual
experience thus as I've noticed noted
earlier
the worlds we each construct have three
layers now the knowledge of the worlds
we each construct
have three layers a personal liar
derived from life experience now a
personal layer conjectured from life
experience our cultural ads arrived
from childhood printing no again
conjectured or learned from childhood
imprinting so-called imprinting and a
biological layer derived
um
from The evolutionary background of our
species well a biological layer perhaps
contained within our genes
but even then it's you know it's still a
form of conjectural knowledge
so
the language here is um obviously not in
accord with the way in which popper
would have explained epistemology and
how we go about constructing knowledge
of the world far be it from constructing
the world
there is no such deriving of knowledge
in that way we have experiences of all
kinds our way of seeing the world our
knowledge of it
is yes shaped by the culture that we're
in we have cultural knowledge of how to
move throughout our society we need to I
need to know that in Australia I stand
on the left
when I'm on an escalator or something
like that if you're emotionless so that
people can overtake you on the right
in other countries it's different that's
cultural knowledge
it helps me move around okay people
learn that pretty quickly there's all
sorts of cultural knowledge like that
what to do in particular situations how
to behave what the expectations are what
you do
to make your way in the world
there are also so that's cultural
knowledge which you you pick up you
don't have to know explicitly at times
the the rules of grammar
thank you
of
English any native English speaker
doesn't have to know them explicitly
can't say
you know what the rule is might not know
what the past perfect tense is unless
they've studied this stuff
or why you should use it here rather
than there but they just do it they have
the inexplicit knowledge they can't
explain what the rules of grammar are
they just adhere to the rules of grammar
they know the rules of the game without
being able to
say in English what those rules are
it just usually feels right to them
to speak in a particular way
so that's cultural knowledge there are
also inborn ideas which are they're in
our genes and of course we also have
personal experiences so all these things
come together but all of it's incurring
in the mind as ideas and ideas can be
changed they can be corrected and
improved sometimes I admit this is
absolutely hard to do and many ideas are
inexplicit
but so far throughout this article I'm
not seeing any clenched fist of reason
um I'm going to skip a paragraph
um and I'm going to pick it up where he
mentioned science so finally we get to
something where there's something
approaching
um a discussion of reason
he says quite
it's the cultural layer that stirs up
the controversy because our culture has
staked its survival and more than merely
its own Survival on the notion that the
particular way its inmates construct the
world is not the jumble of genetic
Collective and individual patterns that
its own science has prove it to be
ha okay and he goes on but end quote you
know what I'm going to say if you're a
listen to the top cast science proves
nothing
science proves nothing it explains
and the explanations are not final
they're Grand misconceptions about the
world but they are explanations of an
objective reality that exists
which is not entirely in our own minds
why because we can do experimental tests
we can get it to kick back
in reliable and eventually predictable
ways
our minds are part of reality
and do not construct all of it
our representations of reality are not
reality itself we do not construct
reality except in those places where we
take literal resources bricks and mortar
metal and paint and musical instruments
and then create stuff
by building it
but this is so far confined to a narrow
part of the surface of one planet much
of the rest of reality really is
independent of what we construct so far
of course
the author goes on to say so he's just
said
um
the world is not the jumble of genetic
Collective and individual patterns that
its own Sciences prove it to be but the
plain unvarnished truth about the
universe which ought to be obvious to
anyone anywhere who pays unbiased
attention to the world around them end
quote so this is the view he's
criticizing right so he's saying
um
our culture so just to repeat this okay
so lost you he's saying that our culture
has staked its survival
on the notion that its inmates people
uh
is not about a jumble of genetic
Collective and individual patterns
but rather
it's the unvarnished truth about the
universe so he's saying that science its
own Sciences prove it to be a jumble
but in fact most people are saying in
our culture
that it revealed the science reveals the
plain truth about the universe which
ought to be obvious to anyone who pays
unbiased attention to the world around
them
end quote so he's kind of having a go at
Richard Dawkins right or a vision of
Richard Dawkins I'm not saying Richard
is an archetypical rationalist the
archetypical rationalists
the caricature of the rationalists
might say something like that I don't
know of any Iraq I know some
rationalists
even the prominent ones would be quite
that strident
to say that oh our culture
um science in particular
gives us the plain unvarnished truth
about the universe which should be
obvious to anyone anywhere who pays
unbiased attention to the world around
them no far from it far from it I think
it's very rare for any rationalist any
scientist anyone to say you get the
unvarnished truth about the universe
even if they're not preparing they you
know they say that
far from it being obvious to anyone it's
not obvious it is not obvious quantum
mechanics is not obvious General
relative is not obvious Evolution might
have selection is not obvious
even if you pay unbiased attention to
the world because you don't extract
any of those theories from the world
that's empiricism that's the error of
empiricism
maybe he's critiquing the empiricists of
the 17th century
perhaps the baconian times
I don't know but it doesn't seem to
represent modern day
rationalists and scientists and so on
um it's pretty rare to hear a scientist
speak about unvarnished truth
that's obvious to everyone they're more
liable to say some people actually can't
understand this stuff it's not obvious
to you know the people of lower IQs and
anyway it's only probably true not
certainly and unvarnished okay so all of
that seems to be unfair but he goes on
to that quote
thus the only version of history that
most people in the industrial world are
willing to consider is one that explains
how people stop believing all the
obviously muddle-headed things they used
to believe about the cosmos and learn to
see reality that was
sitting right out in front of them all
along which of course just happens to be
the one we construct mom by moments we
make our worlds end quote
so again this is a
a critique of the ancient
view of science as being empiricist that
you just observe the world and then you
get the knowledge out of it
okay some scientists sometimes talk like
this but you know pushed
they won't admit they won't say that you
know you can observe the Big Bang
observe the core of a star you know
actually observe single electrons and
that kind of thing or maybe let's say
you can
but I just don't think that this holds
that the rationalists of the world
speak in these terms or even think in
these terms
obviously muddle-headed things they used
to believe about the cosmos and learn to
see reality they were sitting right in
front of them all along well I don't
understand this
some people did move Beyond Superstition
you know one set of claims about the
world to better claims
better explanations
better by those lines of
being able to account for more phenomena
in the universe so they could test for
hard to vary explanations
of what really exists out there
how do you know what really exists
because they feature in those good
explanations
superstitions and myths and these things
that were replaced by these good
explanations
they knew nothing of electrons and
photons electricity and lasers and
Rockets and vaccines
all the Unseen stuff by the way are
physical reality they knew nothing of it
myths
purported to explain the world in terms
of unseen things gods
but they were easy to vary you could
swap out one God for another God
and you couldn't test for them as the
important thing you couldn't test
any prediction that those myths and
superstitions made the Grand advance of
science was here's a claim that you can
test in the world
to see whether or not it actually tracks
reality or not
okay
so
science and rationality reason they
bring into view
what was previously unknown and unseen
and not experienced
you know let's recall Richard Feynman on
rainbows
Rainbows are not made less beautiful for
having understood the physical process
that gives rise to them
I can appreciate all the beauty of a
rainbow that someone who you know
denigrates the power of science does
but I can also appreciate
something more than they do as well
about the remarkable process whereby you
know water droplets can act as
refractors and reflectors splitting up
white light often thought to be pure but
revealed by you know this raindrop this
rainbow not to be as a mixture of all
these different colors that light having
traveled 150 million kilometers from the
surface of the Sun but where it was
produced in the core of that star by
unseen Fusion reactions at 15 million
you know Kelvin
the energy that produced there
eventually creates the rainbow that's
that's an astonishingly beautiful fact
just like the rainbow different kinds of
beauty but hey
he goes on to that quote
there are plenty of problems with that
way of thinking about history but the
one that's most relevant to the project
of this blog can be grasped by recalling
the last time you saw a cat staring
intently at something that you
I'll start again there are plenty of
problems with that why I'm thinking
about history but the one that's most
relevant to the project of this blog can
be grasped by recalling the last time
you saw a cat staring intently that's
something that your eyes didn't see end
quote so again he's making a big deal
about this cat of his
um staring off into space and apparently
seeing things
because its eyes have been stimulated I
don't think that's at all the case
I've had cats most of my life I've still
got two down
um I love my cats but they're not
particularly bright they stare off into
space here's one theory about why they
suddenly stare off into space and appear
to be looking at the ghost
or the the being made of Dark Matter
wandering through here's my theory
not only are their eyes
spectacularly better than ours
especially at night
but they're staring off into space
towards
something they've heard or something
they've smelt
their hearing and sense of smell is
better than a dog's apparently more of
their brain is devoted to the sense of
smell in particular they're smelling
stuff and hearing stuff that is beyond
the range of our senses
that's why they turn their head and then
look
they're probably you know following the
scent
possibly I don't know I'm just saying it
the idea that they're seeing things
seeing things that we can't see that are
there in the room is that's just an
assertion
not a good explanation
I've given you an alternative I don't
know we need to do a a crucial test
um
it could be done by the way you could
have microphones infrared cameras and
chemical detectors in a room
with a cat and when it does look up and
look around
has there been a sound produced at a
frequency higher or lower than what you
can normally hear is there a chemical
now in the room that you know um you you
you can't smell as a human being
you didn't notice beyond the range of
your smell
if you have infrared maybe there's
something in infrared maybe a cat can
seem for it I don't think it can though
but yeah I just don't think cats are
saying things that we can't I think
they're hearing things okay at night
they are at night they're certainly
seeing things we can't see but in a
brightly lit room it's not like they're
seeing ghosts walking around I don't
think that's the case that's the
implication here let's be honest
um
I don't think there's a huge deep
mystery here this doesn't reveal the
reality of magic why do I mention magic
because he's about to dive into magic
okay
so
he goes on to say quote
the world's constructed by different
cultures don't just vary one from
another in how they arrange the flurry
of disconnected data that comes
streaming in through the senses they
also vary in which data they include in
their Arrangements which they exclude
what they consider important and what
gets dismissed as meaningless
it's entirely possible for the world of
a given culture at a given era in its
history to exclude utterly a range of
common human experiences that the worlds
of most other human cultures treat us
having very great importance we know
this because the world of modern
industrial culture does exactly this and
among the things that are excluded in
that world dismissed as non-existent and
meaningless and imaginary other raw
materials of magic end quote
okay so yeah this is a criticism of
the Western World and modernity
fashionable of course at the moment but
fashionable for decades now
um
and it seems to be
downplaying or criticizing modernity
Western culture the enlightenment
tradition for the sin of rejecting
certain tribal ways
now there might be some legitimacy here
in that sometimes
you know
modernity might very well have been too
quick to dismiss certain things
cures for diseases that are natural that
actually contain active ingredients work
and that kind of thing and other
practices maybe spiritual
but the fact is that modernity often to
its own detriment
these days does incorporate the
so-called wisdom of other Traditions
when they're shown to work and even when
they don't
that's the wonderful thing about this
thing that we call Western Civilization
it really does welcome allcomers
more than any other culture that has
ever existed
it is and sometimes it was on detriment
sometimes it's on detriment
um you know Western culture welcomes
those who uh yeah wandering the streets
dressed in robes as if they're from a
millennia ago
preaching some version of you know
the name your religion
or they dress in some way that an
ancient tribe does or even an extant
tribe from another culture does Western
culture says you're welcome here
Western culture Embraces all of it in a
way that no other culture does no other
culture opens its arms to the degree
that the modern Enlightenment societies
do
often our arms are too wide
and we do Embrace nonsense even at the
political level
and it enters the morals aren't Christ
and so on yeah people are free
to to practice sense and nonsense from
inside and outside Western culture in
Western culture people are you know
afraid to practice Buddhism in the west
so paganism exists in you know modern
America and Europe no one's excluded in
our culture
insofar as you don't want to destroy it
all but even then even then you can
espouse the fact that you want to
destroy it all and and in some places in
the west you met with little to no
penalty in fact you can be celebrated
for saying that it's all terrible and
you wish to would all
fall
um but to me it sounds like the author
here of this piece has a very specific
if not a specific person in mind they
have a specific social group in mind
when they've written this article
because it's just not true of this
modern industrial culture that he's
talking about
it might be true of particular
individuals
but as I sit here now I don't see that
modern Western culture just out and out
Rejects
the wisdom of other cultures it just
doesn't happen
unless I say often to its own detriment
it takes on even bad ideas
What's the culture is vast and huge and
there are it's multifaceted and complex
and there are people
this guy for example he's he's bringing
it in as he's saying he's not part of
western the modern industrial culture
maybe he is saying
he goes understanding that quote
what those raw materials are how they
relate to other aspects of the universe
of human experience and how the
operative Mage identifies them and puts
them to work will be the subject of
quite a few posts a little later on the
point I'd like to make here is that the
exclusion we're discussing is a very
recent thing about the industrial world
end quote no it's not
uh
cultures reject other cultures
the Western world
is the first
to fully open its arms wide to welcome
everyone
that's the recent thing the recent thing
is to
be tolerant of everyone
even of the intolerant at times
so I don't think this is a very the
exclusion is a very recent thing no it's
not
it's exclusion of
of other cultures was common
um
as for the exclusion of magic in the
Western World I don't know if that's or
maybe
on geological time it's recent but in
terms of Western culture well again
but
religion traditional religion has
replaced other religions and the
scientific worldview yeah okay
challenged religion and it challenged
mythical ways of understanding stuff
but then entirely replace them you know
the whole the whole point of Western
culture is that again it allowed for the
liberal Embrace of any worldview that
you like
modular trying to actually destroy it
um
he goes on to say until the final
Triumph of the Scientific Revolution at
the start of the 18th century magic and
a great many things connected with it
were treated as everyday matters in
Western cultures as obviously real as
whether or the misbehavior of Kings end
quote
no doubt yeah sure um but you know what
does he mean by Magic it's hard to tell
I went
looking through a couple of these other
Pages just did a word search on Magic
it wasn't clarified for me whether he
just means
you know certain practices and spells
and the Pagan type Magic
um which is ceremonial but they would
say of course has real power okay fine
um but if he means the literal violation
of physical laws we've got a problem
uh but it could be inexplicit knowledge
in certain ceremonies to relax people
and help help you out psychologically
okay that that yeah fine call that magic
if you like
he goes on the side quote most people
practice magic in one form or another
it's rare to find a household
commonplace book from the Middle Ages
the Renaissance or early modern period
that doesn't have an assortment of
spells for healing divination and the
like right in there alongside recipes
for Heather Island mustard plasters end
quote yeah absolutely of course we
lacked modern science we lacked medicine
when we found things that worked
then of course
these ancient nostrums were
rejected
not because this was a
unwillingness to embrace magic it was
just a an experimental test in the real
world
got a stomachache
try the spell
or try the paracetamol let's see what
works well it's not the fault of
industrialized medicine
that the spell for stomachache failed to
work
it's the fault of and
explanation that just wasn't there
the claim that saying some words and
imbibing a particular
um tincture was going to fix your
disease
but insofar as these things in the
modern day work okay people
yeah burning sage or casting spells if
it works for you psychologically great
okay I was asked what would critical
rationalism say about the well
my vision of knowledge creation entails
that people are a very different one
from another
you know you burn Sage throughout the
house that might show no objective
benefit in a randomized control trial as
to whether it does anything for
depression let alone cancer
but there may be a selection effect
those who burn Sage
throughout the house may you know
that they may be the people who are
already depressed and tend in the
direction of rejecting science anyway
so they embrace the mystical and it's a
it's a placebo
so it works for them and I would have no
problem with that I have no problem with
people
doing what it takes to relieve
themselves of discomfort
call it magic if you want
call it the placebo I think it doesn't
matter there's a place for that within a
rational worldview
you know it's sometimes been said that
those who meditate tend to do so because
they need to do so so of course it works
for them
perhaps the state achieved by
you know meditation or sage burning or
name your practice
is also achieved routinely by others who
almost never do so because they
already have the inexplicit knowledge of
how to do
how to achieve those States
without trying hard at all
as Sam Harris makes the point you know
um that if there are people very early
on who develop a facility with piano
playing you know the virtuosa prodigies
that age sort of three or four that can
play amazing pieces on the piano clearly
they have lots and lots of inexplicit
knowledge
they've picked it up very early on
um who knows how but they have they're
skilled at it it's they probably
wouldn't be good teachers of it because
they're so good at it they can't tell
you how they're doing what they're doing
well it may well be the case that you
get those sort of virtuoso prodigies in
terms of contemplative practice as well
in the world
but they might never know it they might
never know they're a genius when it
comes to contemplation and meditation
and no one else might know either that
they are except that they appear in the
world to be exceedingly well adjusted
and happy people
yeah and for the rest they need spells
and other things to get them there I'm
not denigrating any of this again I say
you know meditation is a genuine real
thing for example I shouldn't be
conflating that with casting spells it's
not obviously these things are different
I'm saying that there are people who
would regard and obviously the writer of
this article is talking about magic is a
real thing that can have real real
effects so too with meditation in both
cases they are separate from science
because it's hard to do
how to objectively
do an experiment in the world to test
for the subjective nature of these
things of course there's objective tests
you can do you can do surveys and so on
psychologists to say that ah look you
know people who engage in meditation
they really are you know helped out by
this so too with the magic kind of thing
you know
um
so
the fact is that the
well certainly in the case of meditation
absolutely real
as Sam Harris says you can investigate
the reality of meditation the little
into the laboratory of your own mind and
Naval you know he says where's the
effect if you're if you're trying hard
to do meditation you're already doing it
wrong
um my point is that there's nothing in
an enlightened modern world view
informed by reason and science that
rejects any of this are priori even
so-called critical rationalism allows
for this it's it's completely silent on
it
the conjecture stuff in your personal
life all you like and try it out if it
works keep it
call it magic if you like of course
deluding yourself is no good so you've
got to be aware there you've got to be
critical
um but this opposition between reason
the clenched fist of reason
and anything in the world that can bring
peace and joy to those who need it
that's not reasonable that's not a
reasonable
dichotomy to set up in the world
reason is
not bringing the fight here
as far as I can tell in this article
yeah maybe some people rationalists
are a bit abrasive but what I can say is
that
the representative of magic here is
bringing the fight to reason because of
rumors they've heard about reason or
they're laboring under a misconception
about rationality but then people who
promote rationality labor under a
misconception about rationality
Stephen pinko
others you know but what can you do
he goes on to say quote
the relationship between Magic and
religion all through those centuries has
been misunderstood and misstated by
almost everyone outside of a handful of
scholarly Fields Valerie Flint's the
rise of magic in early Medieval Europe
for example shows that one of
Christianity's major selling points in
the post-roman Dark Ages
was that it's priests and monks were
considered better at Magic than their
Pagan Rivals from the fall of Rome
straight through to the late 14th
century charms and incantations were
forbidden only if they invoked someone
other than God Christ or the Saints it
was very late in the Middle Ages with
the dominance of the nominalist movement
and Christian philosophy that people
started looking a scans at traditional
Christian magic and it took centuries
for that disapproval to evolve into the
claim that things are hardly disapproved
of didn't exist in the first place
end quote so this is an historical
account there's no references there's no
other literature I can look at it's a
vision of history and when you do
history the important thing is that you
well if you're doing proper history you
should be referring to Historic
documents where can I go to to check
these claims I'm not particularly
interested in trying to check these
claims you know everything that said
there is checkable
maybe the sources disagree one with
another maybe you've got to massage the
facts to get these things out so I just
don't know I don't know if what is being
said about the history of this is
correct
at all and yeah as I say I'm not
interested in checking at this point
um
I went like I said I went through his
website
um and looked up that something he
posted called the high doctrine of magic
which just goes on for pages and pages
and pages that still didn't clarify for
me you know exactly what magic is to the
author but you know I admit I didn't
comprehensively search the whole website
um he goes on to say quote
the dubious sort of History I mentioned
earlier which treats all previous
thought as a collection of obvious
stupidities that Humanity only got
around to our growing in the 18th
century very often seizes on the decline
full of magic at the dawn of the
Scientific Revolution as a case study
see everybody believed in this stuff
until the early Enlightenment finally
gave us all a clue end quote who hurt
this guy who hurt this author who has
upset him and insulted him who is he
who's he lashing out against
just
um
look
I guess there are some yeah there are
okay I admit there are some people out
there who are poor representatives of
rationality
who just go really hard at religion as I
admit you know when I came out of school
I probably went too hard all the
zealotry of a convert so to speak this
is a feature of let's admit it young
males I know young females do it as well
it's a feature of Youth
and there are benefits to that but
there's also a a they can be a
callousness that comes along with this
you know that people have their happy
little set of beliefs maybe they're
irrational you know magic and so on and
some people can be insulting all right
and you've got a choice then if if
you're in that position of having these
beliefs about magic or other things that
people regard as irrational you can't
you're gonna either ignore them or you
can engage but why do you need to engage
if it's working for you what does it
matter what do you care
you know you can go and help others who
also endorse your magic it doesn't you
know
people who are oncologists
um maybe they do maybe they get really
upset if people say that you know
oncology is a bad thing but you know
most often I think what they do is they
just get on with the work of doing
oncology getting on with the work of
helping people getting on with the work
of helping to treat cancer
that's what they do that's the greatest
refutation of people who say this stuff
doesn't work is to just use it and show
that it does so too with magic you know
you don't need to write long essays
about
how
you know these other people reject your
ideas and they're wrong to do so just
show that it works that's all
um
he goes on the same quote
take the time to read the ancient Greek
philosophers and you'll get to watch
the same Revolt in full swing two
Millennia earlier than ours just as
Johannes Kepler cast horoscopes to pay
the rent and Isaac Newton devoted as
much of his time to Alchemy as he did to
physics end quote
yeah but neither of those examples
show
you know that that horoscopes work or
that Alchemy works we know that Alchemy
can't work
chemically speaking
there's no chemical reaction you can do
to produce gold
of course nuclear reactions in theory
allow you to produce gold from you know
hydrogen
but that's a separate thing and then you
knew nothing about that so Newton did
waste his time on Alchemy he did waste
his time
whether or not all the time was wasted
an Alchemy you know in terms of
civilization maybe he showed what
wouldn't work this didn't work this
didn't work and so we ruled out Alchemy
sooner than we would have if Newton
hadn't done all that work I don't know
I don't know enough about the history of
alchemy
but
if the author here is saying that
how come it's legit in some way and
that's magic well that's nonsense
um
skipping a little
uh brings up Plato
he says Plato arguably the pivotal
figure of the Greek Enlightenment
inherited Pythagoras's mathematical
magic but chucked out the Magic in favor
of the first draft of Greek logical
method and wrote scornfully about the
way the majors of his time peddled
spells and initiations daughter in
Athens end quote well no one likes a
door-to-door Salesman no one wants to do
what it does it doesn't matter what
they're selling maybe selling iPhones
it's irritating
you don't get them much from these days
so I can imagine you know Plato's there
he's trying to write the Republic and
people are banging on the door trying to
sell him a spell interrupting one of the
greatest Geniuses of all time I am I'm
sitting down part of the western Canon
here
go away with your spells like you can
understand that you know
why he would devote a few lines to to
writing scornfully about the way the
majors of his time peddled spells
they're probably rude
maybe they'll maybe they were writing
Barbed articles at the time about how
Plato's reason was an ugly feature of
modern Greek culture you know who knows
he goes on to ride okay not Plato this
author he writes quote
the philosophers of the centuries right
after Plato had even less time for magic
than he did
end quote yes just as car mechanics and
chemists do they've got less time for
magic as well we've all got jobs we've
got stuff to do the job of a philosopher
is not to be a magician
nor explain anything outside of their
interests they can do their own thing
what were the made what were the
magicians and Majors doing let's turn
this around
why weren't the majors writing more
about philosophy what's the problem here
and if you look
um
look if you're a Plato and you've gone
to the local Mage because you've got as
I said before if you've got tummy cat
you've got tummy ache your Plato you go
after the local Mage they give you a a
nostrum they perform a spell and the
next day you're even worse maybe you've
got some cause the right scornfully
about them maybe this is what happened
over and again to Majors because
medicine was so terrible back then try
this treatment doesn't work try this one
that's actively harmful so
this is a problem right people
wanted to be relieved of pain they
wanted to be relieved of disease they
wanted to survive longer than they did
they wanted to feel better
but they were in pain they were
suffering they were tired
it was an awful time
they were they they wanted something and
so
magic and spells and that kind of thing
was offered but it didn't work it's not
around today as much
prominently because we've got stuff that
works if it worked we'd use it
genuinely
people are in extremists in disease and
depression everything else if this stuff
reliably works for a an overall majority
of people don't you think
don't you think there would be
corporations clamoring to have an
Institute of magic and spells they'd be
selling the stuff but no they sell the
stuff that works and they make billions
of dollars on stuff that works that's
how the world works there's no great
conspiracy here you probably would say
there's conspiracy
okay
um you guys understand quite by the
beginning of the Common Era practicing
magic was strictly for peasants the
urban poor and exotic people in Far Away
places who supposedly didn't know any
better
Lucian of samosata the amazing Randy of
the first century CE wrote a series of
hilarious satires on the Flim Flam that
he claimed was being practiced by the
majors and Prophets of his time it's
among the recurrent themes of these
satires that most of the people clueless
enough to fall for such obvious humbug
were illiterate yokels
end quote the whole tone of this article
is butt hurt
why is he taking it so personally so
he's he's clearly having a go at people
today rationalists who are criticizing
magic modern day magic that he's a
proponent of and he's saying oh look
you're rationalists there's a long
history of this there's a long history
of this going back to the beginning of
the Common Era you know but people would
say that you know it was only for the
poor and the it's a literate yokels that
do this
as I say he could a mage today and so
far as they exists just go on do your
thing make progress if what you're doing
works
use it on those who it works on and be
happy
and by the right way you know illiterate
yokels
that's very judging judging mcjudge face
you know who
what's wrong with an illiterate Yokel
okay keep going
um not much more to read here I don't
think
uh I'll wrap it up
um before the end but I think uh he goes
on to say quote
now of course there was still plenty of
magic being practiced in the classical
World in those years and not just by
yokels
the Greek Enlightenment like the
European like the later European one was
fashionable on the wealthier end of
society and only penetrated down the
social pyramid to a limited extent end
quote so he's saying the later European
one was only fashionable for the wealthy
and only penetrated down the social
pyramid to a limited extent well that is
up and down straight up and down Falls
not true for one thing we're still in
the European enlightenment
the British and European Enlightenment
let's not get into that now
and it's been the best thing for
everyone on the planet for everyone on
the social pyramid indeed it's turned
the least wealthy people into more
wealthy people than the most wealthy
people in bygone eras
anyone of modest means
who possesses a phone with Uber Eats
has a wider selection of foods for
dinner than
the richest monarchs of the Middle Ages
by far by far
the least wealthy Among Us are more
wealthy than the wealthiest
in the past
and and it's egalitarian this European
Enlightenment which continues after all
many of us uh you know Elon Musk let's
say that Elon Musk is the richest person
in the world I don't know the richest
person seems to yeah the top three
places keep changing don't they
something something like that anyway
um but all of us are equally wealthy
compared to Elon Musk in certain
respects I mean anyone with the very
latest and best iPhone has a phone that
Elon Musk himself cannot best
the Enlightenment equalizes and reason
equalizes
in a way that traditional wisdom kept
and guarded by experts perhaps expert
Majors doesn't
priests and Prophets and
cultists and people who come from
Supernatural traditions
they tend in the authoritarian Direction
and this is something that you know the
scientific tradition rejects it rejects
that
perhaps in rejecting that you know you
we're not supposed to Simply bow down to
the authority of the person who says
this magic works I don't need to test it
in any attempt to have me test it is
itself a biased form of patriarchal
Western Society
yeah
our standards today our criteria for
reason and progress are better we've
learned something
you know these I that well let's just
read he says he goes on to them
furthermore then is now there were
always members of the educator classes
who kept up an interest in magic
and there were certain traditional
organizations the mysteries in the
classical World Freemasonry in the
modern one
that didn't exactly practice magic but
offered initiations that were rooted in
Old magical traditions and passed on
teaching symbolism and ceremonials Rich
with magical possibilities end quote No
Doubt yeah those Traditions were also
rich in authoritarianism and secrecy
not exactly the way we do things now
with our openness and egalitarianism and
value of the individual
the individual's capacity to generate
knowledge and be in charge of themselves
rather than defer to the authority of uh
the wise men and the majors
he goes on to say quote as the Charisma
of Greek rationalism faded and its
internal contradictions became steadily
more problematic
in turn these survivals became the seeds
from which magic promptly revived end
quote
um so that's just an assertion he just
said
the Charisma of Greek rationalism faded
and its internal contradictions became
steadily more problematic what internal
contradictions just maligning this Greek
rationalism
Greek philosophy yeah sure there are
these period called Dark Ages but as you
know people have said recently um
probably misnamed uh it's not like
wisdom was forgotten there but there was
this period where there was
the Greek ancient Greece was
a mini Enlightenment rapid progress was
happening certainly in philosophy
mathematics
who knows what would have happened to
Athens if it had persisted for longer
but you know that knowledge was
stagnated for a while
uh once ancient Greece ceased to be the
PowerHouse of progress that it was
and the Middle Ages you know Dark Ages
Middle Ages were was much more slow
progress
so
what what the author of this article
then goes on to say is you know this is
part of the Cycles thing so I'm not
going to read through it he says the
magic comes back
and Christianity was infused with with
magic
um I don't know anything about the
history that he's giving in this
paragraph so I don't want to read it
because I don't know if it's true and I
don't know I don't know about that
knowledge at all
they said I'd have skipped away he says
quote
this same patterns I just talked about
the rise and fall of magic can be traced
in the life cycles of other
civilizations in India for example where
the local version of the rationalist
Revolt going on in the 6th Century BCE
and in China where it took off a little
later
today's rationalists like to point out
the Greek rationalists Indian
rationalists and Chinese rationalists
not to mention their peers and other
civilizations
didn't embrace the same beliefs as the
current example of the rationalist
species and of course
they're quite correct in saying so
they run off the rails when they insist
that because people in other
civilizations didn't Embrace The
Peculiar way that modern industrial
civilization attracts the world as the
plain unvarnished truth this means that
these other rationalisms weren't really
rationalists
end quote so again this is he's got
particular people in mind he's arguing
with someone in his head uh
like who who talks about this plain
unvarnished truth that he keeps using
this phrase
not people who've read popper for
example but even more broad to that you
know I don't tend to hear this phrase so
he's got someone I don't know someone in
mind or some group of people in mind
that he's responding to here it'd be
better if he sat up front you know this
is it's who I'm responding to an article
I'm responding to
this other blog post or something
but no just general rationalism
whatever rationalism this is it's from I
have Lena this is why I like to quote
people this is what I'm doing right now
literally what I do is
Deutsche and popper and Pinker and
whoever have the quotes let's just talk
about
the general because you do that and it's
like well who are you representing what
ideas are you are you arguing with a
chimera you're arguing with a shadow
you're not actually engaging with anyone
insofar as you're engaging with an idea
it's an idea that you've invented in
your head a version of an idea no one is
willing to defend this is the case of
straw Manning you can't straw man
someone easily
when you quote them in full that link
they're at length I should say in full
yeah
um don't say
so what you're saying is okay that old
trope
that he's providing a summary of what he
regards as rationalism
but I don't know what it is I don't know
who's talking about it it
doesn't resemble what
I regard as rationalism and so therefore
I can't defend the thing that he's
attacking all I can do is explain what I
understand rationalism to be by which I
mean
um the capacity to correct errors
that's it until rationalism is about
um the The Stance of
trying to correct errors for the purpose
of making progress and improving things
uh errors where errors in your ideas
errors in your best explanations of the
world that's rational that's the
rational thing to do is to continue to
correct errors and reason is a
broad category of approaches from
mathematics science philosophy these are
parts of reason and we apply rational
methods that error correction in all of
them
that's
sort of a distinction sort of a
distinction not hard and fast but the
way I like to try and understand this
thing derived from the work of David
Deutsch I would say
um but not meant to be a quote okay
um so he says this the author says quote
that objection
um
in other words that other rationalisms
that came before modern rationalism
um that objection is as predictable as
it is hopelessly wrong each culture
constructs its own world end quote
it's knowledge each culture constructs
its knowledge of the world it doesn't
construct the world
but insofar as the constructors down
buildings we've tracked its own
buildings in the physical world then yes
but constructing ideas in your mind is
not the same as constructing the world
it really isn't it really isn't
there's a world out there
so he says
each culture constructs its own world
its own man-old top the common
Foundation provided by human neurology
and instinct
and so each civilization's version of
rationalism attempts to make rational
sense of a different world end quote
no it's not a different world they're
not making sense of a different world
maybe they're making sense of the
society around them which is different
but the world the overall World includes
other cultures so Western culture
includes other cultures and we can make
sense of those other cultures nurse
cultures can make sense of us the people
the individuals in them I should say the
individuals in them
we know
um that it's the same world because
uh insofar as our understandings
of it or accurate they work to produce
stuff that works either the knowledge
that you have is going to get your
rocket to the moon
your vaccine is going to work or your
computer computes are a dozen there are
objective measures of these things in
terms of you know Technologies
advancements predictions and the
observations made
the photons really do land there and not
there that can be checked by anyone
independent of culture independent of
culture independent of anything about
the person one of the great strengths of
science is you can extract out the
background of the person
they can agree on well there's the dot
and there's not the DOT
okay we can agree we can Converge on
reality
we don't just construct it
okay he goes on to say quote every other
civilization's rationalist movement has
been as convinced as ours that its way
of thinking about the universe was the
plain unvarnished truth end quote
I'm not convinced about those blanket
statements either about our
civilization's rationalist movements
he says movement but I think there are
multiple rationalist movements
we know that there is the schism
between
various people calling them rational
I've already said one you know Stephen
Pinker would say he's a rationalist I
suppose I would call him as such but
he's not the it wouldn't be a critical
rationalist
he doesn't seem to endorse conjectural
knowledge for example so there's one
difference
um
so yeah critical rationalism the idea of
conjectural knowledge fallibilism so on
and so forth
is all-encompassing doesn't
a priori rule out anything that's not
science
by any stretch
it doesn't rule out and even
Wittgenstein you know he doesn't rule
out religion as well he just said he
couldn't talk about it he said it could
still exist
Papa would say you can talk about this
thing you know insofar as it's a claim
about the world and the world doesn't
just mean physical or anything anything
any claim that can be made can be
assessed can be critiqued can be
explained
um
so it's all encompassing uh now
he speaks there about other
civilizations rationalist movements well
look how many of them were there really
I'm just taking it on faith
doesn't does rational just mean an
attempt to understand the world you know
so the Chinese had their
uh
attempts to do this ancient Greece did
another
um people in the Middle Ages
but how much were they really
rationalize like the enlightenment the
modern Enlightenment that continues
began you know around the Renaissance
you know 16th 17th 18th centuries
it continues through to today
like that does stand apart that really
does stand apart why because of
as David Deutsch explains in the
beginning of infinity a culture of
criticism the culture of criticism is
something that is different
okay yeah so he keeps he goes on to say
um
uh he talks about the plain unvarnished
truth again so it's plain unvarnished
truth that supposedly
the rationalists endorse well you know
these are interpretations we're saying
um he then goes into a lengthy history
as well
mentioning everything from
um
well we just got a whole bunch of names
there that I don't know who they are
talks about Doctrine and ritual of high
Magic
in 1854
um
something about
the flowering of psychical research at
the end of the 19th century during the
flowering of parapsychology from the 40s
through the 70s Okay so
um
and and concludes this particular
paragraph with crucially to the
background but crucially to the
breakdown of our civilizations
rationalist worldview is proceeding at
something very like the usual pace
end quote so he's got a barrow to push
he wants to say ah look there's a
pattern here what do we think about
patterns in history
they're not bound to repeat that's
historicism
it's the poverty of historicism this
idea that you can look to the past and
say there were these Cycles I'm not
convinced there are these Cycles let's
say there were they have been that
doesn't mean it's going to happen in the
future this idea that
the breakdown of our civilization's
rationalist worldview I don't say that
at all I see accelerating growth
I see improvements all the time I see
every reason for optimism
there are blips and there are concerns
there are problems because we are never
in a non-problematic state that's what
animates us to talk about the problems
but the overall
trajectory is
onwards and upwards and better and more
progress and happiness and joy and fun
and it's great
um more wealth more people
rational approaches to the world are
improving everything across all areas
scientific
philosophical moral dare we say
spiritual as well
we have embraced recently over the last
few decades
because of the promotion of some people
a new kind of spirituality an enriched
spirituality
now people are even returning to
traditional religions to some extent so
far from you know this this downcast
View
of um the breakdown of our civilizations
rationalists will do I don't see that at
all I don't see any indications of this
I think this is someone with a barrier
to push that you know obviously
is upset with some people
wants to say their vision of magic
is somehow rather
worthy as a competitor to the scientific
World here
I would say just insofar as it works do
it with the people that you do it you
don't need to proselytize when things
work
and why be down so down on reason
irrationality like he's having a great
rationality throughout this it's called
the clenched fist of Reason why'd you
say down on it
um the whole point of reason rationality
is
it it just Embraces the practices that
work insofar as we talk about
things that are good for people
it's only a threat it's only a threat
and a worry it should be only a threaten
to worry to Liars boasters those
exaggerating those are my claims that
won't work when tested and what's wrong
with that kind of rationality and reason
what's wrong with protecting the
vulnerable
when they need protection we may need
more of it
I'm not talking about government
intervention
I'm saying that people of Reason need to
stand up and to call out nonsense when
they see it
this doesn't need to be said as
denigrating
spirituality
look presently there are whole political
movements devoted to attracting young
people
Christian so children
Children and Youth in particular
um
but there are these political movements
into they're trying to drag children and
young people into a weird kind of cult
where they're supposed to
change their gender
change the sex change the sexuality
because it's fashionable it's
fashionable to be non-binary it's
fashionable to be anything other than
straight and CIS male and female
there are reasons to be concerned about
this
because
people are children are having their
bodies changed in ways that aren't
irreversible for now now look I'm not an
essentialist
there is no such thing as the the male
mind and the female mind there might be
characteristics you know different
between them
but mine's a universal
and off into a distant future you'll be
able to occupy whatever body you want
fine yeah that's the non-essentialist
part okay that's the the truly gender
fluid part of things but we're not there
yet and because we're not there yet
people are refusing to accept reality
the reality of where we are in 2023 for
example
people are being offered magic they're
being offered
the opportunity to change their bodies
in ways that are irreversible being told
it is reversible
the most vulnerable young people in
extremists young people who are
depressed young people who are confused
and weren't we all when we were of a
certain age
they've got little defense against this
often precisely because the forces of
Reason have relinquished the ground to
those with untested and untestable
claims
or rather often claims tested and shown
to be awfully damaging to be refuted
by actual results in the real world in a
large number of people girls who've had
hysterectomies as young teens because
they claim to be boys
but no one criticizes that claim
and they may be claiming to be a boy not
because they really feel like a boy
because they want attention
that there's some other need they have
being served by claiming to be a boy and
they're ushered into the operating
theater
to have their reproductive organs
removed
and supposedly their gender changed
we might say the doctors that are doing
this are offering the magic magically
being transforming them into a real boy
but of course then the girl these
stories are becoming more common
these stories are becoming more common
then they turn around at age 21 and say
they they regret it all and they want to
sue because no one ever challenged them
no one ever said this might not be a
good idea
sit down and let's talk about this
let's reason this through let's think
rationally not entirely emotionally
let's understand stuff here
when they say you can reverse this you
can't
maybe one day in the future
okay when we've got cyber cyborg
cybernetic bodies we can do this but
we're not there yet we're not there yet
this is the
this is the compassion of reason and
rationality
to recognize a problem in the world and
to correct it before it becomes
uncorrectable
before we do a thing that we can't
reverse because entropy is a thing and
imperfection's a thing and limited human
knowledge is a thing
that's not a clenched fist that's the
hand of help to people into in in
distress and and these days with respect
to that very issue that I'm talking
about
people being manipulated politically
this is the reason for rationality and
reason among many other things not to
mention progress in society of course
so don't be upset don't be upset if
people challenge your magical claims
it's just you know people wanting to be
reasonable in many cases compassionate
as well
um
okay I'm skipping a bit you know I don't
know pick it up where he says quote
sooner or later the things that have
been excluded from the World by any
rationalist system will include things
that can't be ignored without putting
the survival of civilization at risk and
when those things are ignored anyway as
they normally are the consequences are
all too familiar from the historical
record end quote
the extinction of societies over time
is a consequence of
not embracing reason enough
The Cure
for this all too familiar consequences
of
civilizations being at risk The Cure is
more rationality in reason not less
if something has been excluded from the
World Knowledge I suppose that puts
civilization at risk it is reason and
knowledge creation and problem solving
that will bring it back
wishing
it weren't so
isn't going to help using magic won't
cut it when the asteroid is heading our
way but I don't see any sign of this
thing that is putting civilization at
risk
but I I things are only getting better
irrevocably getting better
okay so he goes on to say quite
that's why rationalist movements in
their final years when it finally
becomes impossible to ignore these
things any longer always end up making
peace with the Realms of magic myth and
religion
they've previously spent so many years
and so much effort denouncing
to put the same thing another way that's
why the magical the esoteric religion of
a waning civilization ends up absorbing
the heritage of that civilization's
broken down racialism repurposing it to
cope with the unmet needs of time
and placing it in a context of practice
that keeps it from blinding itself with
its own abstractions quite so readily as
when given free reign
end quote
so that's one vision of History
the history of the world however is a
history of static societies that
rejected reason and progress and error
correction and rationality eventually to
some degree or the other
dominated by anti-rational memes that
slowed progress
they these societies eventually failed
to make any any progress
their means of error correction was
destroyed Switched Off in their minds by
hoping that magical thinking could save
them that
was their circumstance that could be our
circumstance but it doesn't seem to be
it's taking on anti-rational ideas
that's the history of the world
dead dead civilizations were not killed
off
by the deployment of too much reason and
rationality but rather
for want of it
okay last paragraph
that I'll read of his
article and it is the last paragraph of
the article quote
magic as I suggested in last month's
post is the reset button for mines that
have allowed their worlds their
representations to get out of sync with
the reality those representations are
meant to describe in all ages that's
highly useful for individuals at certain
times which occur with remarkable
predictability
and the lives of civilizations that's
necessary for entire societies
we live in such a time in case you
haven't noticed end quote
prophecy
the the idea that we live in these times
where we're going to need Magic
the reset button for mine sort of
allowed their world to representations
to get out of sync with the reality no I
don't
I don't buy any of this but perhaps you
know what I will concede is that some
people can benefit from
what might be called magical practices
fine let those individuals do as they
wish
we don't understand everything if
someone wants to burn sage in order to
feel better or to cast a spell in order
to feel better I've got no problem with
that it fits within a rational world
view it is when you say this thing can
actually work for you regardless of who
you are but you can't test it and if
your experimental test reveals that it
doesn't work it still does that's where
we've got a problem
Russell Brand I noticed recently
um you know he's into all this magical
stuff but I noticed recently in an
interview he said something quite funny
and telling he said that when his
pregnant wife was in pain
he didn't want the Reiki healer in the
house
he wanted the Western trained doctor in
the lab coat with the pills and the
injectables quite right
when the chips are down you want the
best explanations
when you're mildly psychologically
uncomfortable
in Western medicine and science and
reason hasn't got much to offer because
it hasn't paid much attention to the
minor inconveniences of life then maybe
magic can help maybe it's better than
nothing maybe
maybe at least it can you know casting a
spell saying these words burning this
thing candles whatever
can at least distract you for a while
from your boredom and depression and I
imagine that certainly
can be a problem for some people there's
an epidemic indeed of boredom and
depression because
people have failed to find the problem
to fall in love with
okay I think that's enough um
again to the Lily Justice let's just
answer her question
I see no other way for this coming and
I'm not persuaded that there were waves
I'm just taking it as faith that his
account of History was there's waves of
rationality and spirituality he didn't
use that word to use magic I don't know
that I'd conflate those two words
necessarily I think there is a rational
way of understanding spirituality that
someone like Sam Harris would espouse
um
that wouldn't include magic that this
fellow espouses because I get the sense
that this fellow is talking about the
literal supernaturalism
and I think that literal supernaturalism
isn't necessarily what spirituality is
about but it might very well be what
magic is about I don't know
whatever the case even if there were
these cycles of rationality and
spirituality that is no reason to
presume that will continue that would be
induction that's historicism that's
thinking you can predict
the future evolution of entire
civilizations based upon what happened
in the past
it was a Marxist idea as well you know
therefore we need to implement this
political idea therefore we need to
implement all magic
it's one perspective on the past I think
that our story is more like a tale of
people repeatedly escaping darkness and
stasis
perhaps
some useful stuff in that process is
rejected along the way
but reason and rationality are the
processes by which you can
indeed you will ReDiscover it if it's a
solution to the problems that you have
that's what reason does and individuals
can do this so individuals want to
pursue magic should do so and test for
themselves in the laboratory of their
own minds and their own life experience
the degree to which this thing works
Popper's message is spiritual if you
like
it's the thing that gives life many it's
the thing that can fill the void that
maybe people who turn to Magic
are trying to fill
find a problem and fall in love with it
until you find a solution
but even when you do
to find a solution
you'll find children problems which are
even more delightful
that sounds pretty magical
and it's certainly rational
it's a nice place to end I think
until next time bye-bye